I've helped countless people recover
from medial elbow pain in my practice.
And today, I'm going to give all that
knowledge to you, or at least the most
relevant parts. In this video, you'll
learn everything you need to know about
elbow pain in or around the medial
epicondile, commonly known as climbers
or golfer's elbow, including what causes
it, what to do to fix it, and how long
it takes to get back to 100%. We'll even
add a bit of secret sauce that could be
the key to unlocking your recovery.
Thanks to Realand for sponsoring this
video. More information about their
amazing protein later in this video. All
this information is for educational
purposes only. None of it should be
taken as medical advice or a replacement
for seeing a qualified professional.
Certain injuries such as ligament tears,
elbow dislocations, snapping elbow
syndrome, and bone fractures will not be
covered here. Proceed at your own risk.
What causes medial elbow pain? There are
two common causes of medial elbow pain
that we'll focus on. Tenon pathologies
such as tenonitis or tenopathies and
nerve compression or impingement. Tendon
pathologies are the ones most people are
familiar with, causing diffused
discomfort in the elbow, adult ache,
which may be localized or spread out, or
a sharp or stabbing sensation. This
issue usually occurs from what we call
overuse, which is a chronic buildup of
tissue damage. If you're not familiar,
this process happens because performing
novel, intense, or repetitive activities
like resistance training, hard climbing,
or swinging a golf club can cause a
small amount of damage to our soft
tissues, including the tendons. This is
not necessarily a bad thing. In fact,
it's an important byproduct of training
that signals our bodies to adapt and
improve those tissues. So, the next time
we perform that activity, we're better
equipped to handle it. However, those
adaptations take time and sometimes they
haven't finished by the time we're back
at the gym or golf course. We may feel
like we're fully recovered because our
muscles tend to adapt much quicker than
tendons, but that doesn't mean all the
tissues are back to 100%. Thus, a little
bit more damage occurs to the tendons
before they've had time to fully heal.
Again, this usually isn't an issue in
the short term. However, when this
occurs over and over again, the slow
buildup of damage to the tendon
eventually becomes significant enough to
make itself known as pain. So, medial
elbow pain that's caused by overuse is a
result of certain tendons being
constantly asked to perform more work
than they can recover from.
Specifically, the most commonly involved
tendons are those of the flexor karpy
ulneris or FCU, the pronator terrace or
PT, and the flexor digtorum
superficialis or FDS. Nerve related pain
on the other hand is a different beast.
It's actually the one that constantly
gets overlooked, which is partly why so
many people feel like they can't get rid
of their elbow pain. In fact, I even
helped write a paper on this. Why is
everyone making this mistake? Because
most people think nerve symptoms can
only be a tingling or burning sensation,
but that's not actually true. The real
symptoms of nerve compression are
diffused discomfort, a dull ache, which
may be localized or spread out, a sharp
or stabbing sensation, or a numbness,
tingling, or burning sensation. Sound
familiar, right? Turns out nerve
symptoms in the elbow can mimic the
symptoms of a tendon pathology. So, if
you have any of those overlapping
symptoms, you shouldn't immediately
assume it's a tendon issue. nerves are
unsurprisingly quite sensitive. So when
one gets compressed too much by a
muscle, it tends to let you know.
Compression of the ular nerve at the
elbow is called cubital tunnel syndrome
or CTS. While compression of the media
nerve at the elbow is called pronator
terry syndrome or PTS. Since the er and
media nerves pass through, under and
between muscles in our elbows and
forearms, you can imagine how frequent
gripping or pull-upike movements could
squeeze them. Now, with so much overlap
between tenon and nerve symptoms, you
might be wondering how you can tell
which one is actually causing your elbow
pain. This can be quite tricky to figure
out because the activities that provoke
your symptoms could be irritating either
the tendon or the nerve or both. For
example, when you do a pull-up, you're
putting strain on the elbow tendons, but
the muscle contractions can also squeeze
the nerves. However, there are some
useful indicators to look for. Numbness
and tingling are symptoms only
associated with nerve compression. If
you experience this as your primary
symptom, it's a nerve. If you have
numbness, tingling, or burning along
with other symptoms like a dull ache,
you might have a combination of nerve
and tendon involvement. Or you might
simply have varying levels of nerve
compression at different times. For
example, you might sometimes have mild
compression that causes a dull ache and
other times have more significant
compression that causes numbness or
tingling. So, combination symptoms could
be tendon and nerve or just nerve. If
your symptoms change with nerve
mobilizations or stretches I'll be
showing you for the chest or shoulder, a
nerve is involved. If your symptoms are
constantly provoked when your elbow is
bent, such as simple things like holding
your phone for too long, a nerve is
likely involved. If you're positive that
your symptoms are only nerve-reated,
then you should watch our video, How to
Fix Nerve Tension for Climbers, instead
of this one. If you think your symptoms
are related to neither tendons or nerves
such as ulner collateral ligament,
sprains, osteochondrocans, arthritis,
snapping elbow syndrome, or any other
ligament or bone issue, this video is
unfortunately not for you. For everyone
else, I recommend you complete the
routine we're about to lay out even if
you're dubious about nerve involvement.
Since it's possible for medial elbow
pain to be caused by both a tendon and a
nerve issue, the secret sauce we
mentioned earlier turns out to be
treating both issues. It's hard for most
non-professionals to properly assess
their own nerve issues, so it's worth
performing the nerve exercises for at
least a couple of weeks. It won't cost
you that much extra time, and you could
very well be surprised by the results.
Bro, please forgive me for I have
committed many atrocities against the
bro code of climbing.
>> Tell me your sins, my dude.
>> Well, there is one person that was
climbing and clearly needed to be
sprayed down by beta, and I didn't. I
let them climb without that advice. I
forgot to take my shirt off during an
entire session. And another time when
someone asked for my advice and I forgot
to give them the obvious note of just go
up, bro.
My dude,
>> try this. What is this?
>> Try it,
>> dude. That's some gnarly good whey
protein, bro.
>> That, my dude, is plant protein.
>> Dude, just don't tell the other bros,
okay? cuz it's delicious. I feel so much
better already.
>> No worries, bro.
>> Hey, by the way. Yeah,
your project is soft.
>> No.
>> Yeah. How do I recover? Before you begin
this protocol, you should have a bit of
context. Because there are multiple
structures that can cause symptoms at
the elbow, the exact recovery exercises
needed can vary from one person to the
next. That means a few things. One, for
the best chance of success, this program
will take a broad coverall basis
approach. While this method has proven
quite effective in lie of an
individually tailored program, it does
mean that the protocol involves a lot of
exercises. But don't let that discourage
you. It won't take long to get the hang
of it. Two, we're not going to cover
every single regression and progression
of each exercise because this video
would never end. If what we lay out here
is too hard for your current stage of
recovery, you'll need to regress the
difficulty to the appropriate level on
your own. Of course, if you don't want
to deal with that, remember you can
always use one of our pre-made recovery
blueprints to make it extremely easy.
Three, this is not a personalized
program, so you may find there are
exercises here you don't need, but that
may be extremely beneficial for somebody
else. Four, you will need access to some
tools, namely dumbbells or a cable
machine, a lever bar or a hammer, or
better yet, any of our torque devices,
and some resistance bands. Step one, the
first step toward recovery is the one no
one wants to hear because it's boring
and kind of stupidly obvious, but that's
exactly why so many people make the
mistake of overlooking it. So, don't be
one of those people. You need to reduce
aggravating factors, which are the
things that make your symptoms worse. As
mentioned, often one of the causes of
elbow pain is simply too much work being
asked of the specific tissues. So, you
can't expect to recover if you keep
piling on the same work. This does not
mean you should stop all activity, but
you need to cut back on the aggravating
factors based on the severity of your
symptoms. In general, if the pain from
an activity does not exceed 2 out of 10
during and 24 hours after you do it,
that activity is likely fine. If an
activity causes more or longer lasting
pain than that, you likely need to
reduce the intensity, reduce the volume,
or change the movement style to bring
the pain down to acceptable levels. Step
two, soft tissue mobilization or
instrument assisted soft tissue
mobilization. STM and ISTM are both
forms of massage therapy, which is a
lowcost method that could have positive
impact on your healing. It's not a
guarantee, but it's thought to improve
the alignment of new tissue, increase
blood flow to the area, and increase
neurological awareness of the area.
Note, it is optional here. If you find
that it irritates or even worsens your
symptoms, it might be because the
painful structure you're trying to
massage is actually your nerve, and it
probably doesn't like that. So, if this
type of massage makes things worse or
does nothing for you, discontinue it.
Step three, tissue stretches. Next,
let's get into a few different
stretches. Unlike the optional
massaging, I do recommend you perform
these stretches even if you don't notice
an immediate change in your symptoms. It
may take a couple of weeks for the
benefits to show up. Up first is a
combination stretch to loosen tight
forearm muscles while mobilizing the
ular and media nerves. To perform the
flexor plus nerve mobilization stretch,
simply start with your elbow in a
neutral position, just gently bent. Pull
the fingers back to create a gentle
stretch anywhere along the forearm. Then
you'll simply try and maintain that
level of stretch while you straighten
the elbow and then fully bend it.
Straightening
and bending. While you're performing the
stretch, you can modulate the intensity
by how much you pull on the fingers or
by how straight or how bent you place
the elbow. Up next will be two pec
stretches. one with the arm at 90
degrees to add a rotational component to
the stretch and the other at about 120
degrees to get more pec minor
involvement. These two stretches are
important because elbow pain can stem
from nerve tension as a result of
compression in the chest or shoulder
region. Performing pec stretches can
mobilize these areas and help alleviate
this compression leading to reduced
elbow discomfort. Place your hand up on
the the object with your shoulder and
elbow at 90°. This is also known as like
a pec 9090 stretch because you got 90
degree angle here and 90 degree angle at
your elbow. Then stag your feet and
simply lean forward and rotate away.
Kind of using my head to indicate that
more. Leaning forward and away until you
feel the right stretch in your shoulder.
You might notice a difference if you
lean versus rotate away. Whichever one
makes you feel a better stretch in the
pec region is what you want to do. It's
also okay if you feel a little bit of
stretch in the shoulder region. That's
not the end of the world. It just
shouldn't be painful. While you're doing
this, it's also important to make sure
that you are kind of pushing and driving
with your back foot. You're not holding
yourself up. That will really limit the
effectiveness of the stretch. And you
really want to make sure that you're not
squeezing your midback to get deeper
into it. That's like the equivalent of
saying that to stretch my quad, I'm
going to engage my hamstring. No, you're
you're just pulling to get into the
stretch. Same thing with this. You're
not squeezing your lower back or your
midback to get deeper into it. You're
just going to push and lean into the
stretch. To get into the 120 version,
just simply slide your hand further up.
Your forearm now may come off of the
object. That's totally fine. But your
your shoulder should now be at more of a
120° angle. And then same things apply.
pushing forward with the feet staggered,
rotating your body away to change the
stretch, looking for a stretch in the
chest or front of the shoulder, not
engaging the midback. Um, and final note
with both of these stretches, if you do
start to notice any tingling sensation,
just lower the arm down by your side,
let the sensation restore to normal, and
then it's okay to to hop back into the
stretch. You can also while that's
recovering just switch to the other arm.
Let that arm restore and hang down by
your side. And then once you've done the
20 to 30 seconds on the other side, you
can do it there. So if you notice that
at about like the 15-second mark you get
some tingling in the hand, just have
that be your time. You don't have to do
the 20 to 30 seconds. If you notice the
tingling or numbness at around 15 or
less, these stretches should not be
painful. Apply only enough force to
generate a mild stretch. And while a
small amount of discomfort, like one to
two out of 10, may be experienced, it
should never be truly painful. If you do
start to feel pain, reduce the stretch
intensity by reducing the range of
motion or the amount of force you're
placing on it. Step four, isolated nerve
mobilizations. There are two primary
techniques: nerve flossing, which is the
gentlest form, and nerve tensioning,
which is the most aggressive form. to be
efficient and once again not make this
video two hours long. We're not going to
be performing those two techniques, but
rather we'll add a bit more secret sauce
and show you the ultraefficient nerve
floss plus tension hybrid technique.
Just note, if you find this hybrid
technique to be too aggressive, you
should regress to the nerve flossing
techniques, which we'll provide
instructions for in the show notes, link
in the description. To perform the hands
low media nerve floss plus tension,
simply start with your elbows flexed and
kind of fingers curled into a fist. And
then you're going to straighten the
elbow. Straighten the fingers. Point
them back behind you like you're trying
to place the palm of your hand on the
floor while also looking to one side.
This means minimal to no stretch on my
right, but yes to stretch on my left. So
the right hand is flossing, the left
hand is tensioning. Then I come back and
I just look the other way. Now the right
hand is stretching, so that's
tensioning. And the left is is flossing.
And you just repeat that. So you just go
side to side.
Floss on one side, tension on the other.
And it just switches back and forth with
every repetition.
If you do get tired of rotating your
head or you feel like a little dizzy,
you can always just lean away as well.
rotation or lean. Either version works.
Just do what feels comfortable to you.
If you do notice this causes pain, you
can change a lot of the factors. Like
you can let the fingers be a little more
relaxed. You can let the elbow be a
little bit less bent. You can even allow
the shoulders to like shrug up some. You
generally want to keep the shoulders
down. Otherwise, you probably won't
really feel the stretch. Um, but if you
do feel an intense sensation, any of
those factors, including allowing the
shoulders to elevate up some, will
reduce the intensity. To perform the
hands high nerve floss plus tension,
start with your elbows bent and hands
kind of just relax funny by your side
like this. Um, and then simply
straighten out both elbows while
extending your fingers as if trying to
point them up as much towards the sky as
you can. Um, now same thing with the the
hands low version. You're going to want
to rotate and look at one side and then
switch back to the other. So, same thing
with this next strap. I'm now flossing
on my right, tensioning on my left, and
then flossing on my left, and tensioning
on the right. The same tips apply from
before where you can modify different
factors like you don't have to point the
fingers as high. You can let the elbows
not bend quite as much or you can pay
attention to the shoulder positioning.
But in general, if tolerated, keep the
shoulders down, straighten the elbows,
and point those fingers up as high as
you comfortably can. Our final nerve
movement will involve the er nerve with
different levels of intensity. The goal
is to find a level that produces a light
stretching sensation anywhere in the
elbow, anterior forearm, palm, ring
finger, or pinky finger. If you feel any
numbness or sharp tingling, immediately
reduce the range of motion or stop the
exercise until symptoms subside. To
perform the ular nerve floss plus
tension for level one, simply start with
your hands placed together looking
straight ahead and then lower the hands
down until you feel a stretch in the
forearm, pinky, hand, ring finger, etc.
You might also feel it directly in the
elbow. You'll just go in and out of this
position.
For level two, you'll just hold this
position while then looking left and
right. This creates kind of our first
true flossing plus tensioning technique
where we will get a floss on the left
and a tension on the right and vice
versa. We'll also create a different
variation of this with level three when
we go into the position, but we then
slide the hands towards one side and the
other. In this case, we are now
tensioning on the left, flossing the
right, flossing on the left, and
tensioning on the right. For the most
advanced one of this video, for the er
nerve, you're now just going to combine
the hand movement with the head
movement. So, we will look away from the
hand that we're gliding to. So, we'll go
back and forth this way, which increases
now the flossing on the left and
increases the tensioning on the right.
And vice versa here, increasing the
flossing on the right and increasing the
tensioning on the left. This might feel
a bit more aggressive. So you can always
modify how far you go with the elbows or
the head. So for example, I feel a big
stretch here on the left. I can modify
that by just not sliding quite as far.
With nerve floss plus tension
techniques, there should be a gentle
stretch in one arm at a time, but it
should not cause pain or discomfort.
Some symptoms may temporarily increase
for a few minutes, but should not last
longer than that. If you feel pain or
discomfort, check your form. If you
believe you're doing this correctly and
still experience an excessive increase
in symptoms, try to reduce the range of
motion to reduce the intensity. If that
doesn't work, discontinue this activity
and consider seeking out more in-depth
management of this issue with a
qualified healthcare provider, as you
may have some nerve tension contributing
to your symptoms that requires
additional management. Finally, we'll
need to do some off-the-wall tissue
strengthening. Of course, you might be
asking, why are you telling us to add
these exercises when earlier you said a
primary cause of the issue is doing too
much? Great question. Replacing
aggravating factors with specific
recovery exercises gives you a
controlled environment to better
understand your symptoms and how they
respond to certain exercises. Your
tissues heal better and faster when
controlled, specific, wellprogrammed
loads are applied to them. These
exercises do just that while
strengthening the surrounding muscles as
a bonus. To start things off, the first
exercise will be forearm pronation
followed by wrist flexion. For all these
wrist exercises, you can use whatever
device is available to you, which is
pretty numerous in ways that you can do
it like the forearm supernation and
pronation. You can use a broomstick, you
can use a PVC pipe, you can even use a
cable machine with a strap to help do
it. So, whatever is available to you
will work. We're simply going to use the
torque pro to demonstrate it because I
find that to be the most fun. To perform
forearm pronation, simply attach your
anchor your weight. I like to start with
it in a vertical position so I get my
grip right and then the for this case
the with the Torque Pro, the arc should
be on the outside.
Open your hand up allowing the weight to
lower down to a comfortable position for
you and then go through your full
available range of motion. If you get
stuck around here, probably just are
using too much weight. If you have pain
at this range, just kind of light in
that range so you don't go to your end
to end range and just go as far over as
you can. It's a okay if your like wrist
flexes a little bit in, but if it's like
flexing a lot in, it's probably because
you chose too much weight. It's also
okay if you notice a little bit of
flexion at the elbow because that is one
thing that that muscle does a little
bit. So that's okay. But again, if
you're having like excessive movement
in, might be a little bit too heavy. So,
just watch for form compensations. To
perform wrist flexion, I'm going to use
um an adjustable bench because that way
I have a nice forearm rest. I'm simply
going to grab the Torque Pro with a
thumb under grip. And then with my load
attached, I'll go into extension and
flex the weight up.
I do like to have some stability and
support here. So, you're not like just
engaging too much bicep by just like
holding the weight up here. Um, and like
I said, like the the adjustable bench is
quite nice for this because the added
padding so it's a little more
comfortable on the forearm. But any
surface will work really as long as you
have some support there. Go through all
available range of motion if you can and
pay attention to like the bar
especially. you can kind of monitor this
cuz if all of a sudden like you're
pulling up and you're creating an uneven
load there, you're biasing one side of
your wrist more than the other. So, you
want to kind of use that as your
indicator of are you moving through this
motion equally and controlled. Moving on
to super set two, we'll start with bicep
curls and finish with finger curls. To
perform bicep curls, just grab a
dumbbell, hold it in each hand. Start in
a neutral position. So, thumbs forward.
And then you're simply going to curl the
weight up while supenating, which means
that at the end of the motion, your arm
should be facing in towards you or your
your palm should be facing in towards
you. We want to have that supenation
moment um to control with the different
muscles at the elbow. We don't want to
just perform a straight hammer curl
variation here. You can do this both
arms at the same time or alternating,
whichever form you feel that's nicer for
you. To perform finger curls, simply
hold dumbbells in each hand and then
lower them down. I like to do it not
right when I feel like they're going to
fall completely out of my hand. But if
it feels like my pinkie is going to come
off, then that's usually my sign that
I've gone deep enough. And then curl
them back up. So you don't have to lower
them so far where you're about in like a
three-finger drag and it'll fall off.
Just go to like towards the end of your
pinky finger, curl back up, and repeat.
Now, you're not doing wrist flexion
here, so you just curl down through the
finger range of motion, making a fist
with the dumbbell each time. If this
routine is new to you, I recommend only
performing each superset twice per
session. That way, you don't add a ton
of load right off the bat. Once you know
you can tolerate that, add in a third
round. Perform each superset in the
order we presented here, completing all
rounds of one superset before moving on
to the next. How long will it take to
recover? If it turns out that it was
just your pesky nerves causing the issue
the entire time, you should notice a
quick improvement in symptoms within a
few days to a few weeks. Though, keep in
mind you might have to manage this long
term, and some nerve symptoms can take
much longer to fully resolve. If you do
notice an improvement with the nerve
techniques and stretches, keep them up.
If it's a regular old tendon pathology,
it can take two to four months to
recover depending on how severe it was
initially and how well you program your
recovery. Remember, if you want to take
the guesswork out of recovery, save
yourself a whole lot of time, and get a
program that's specifically designed for
recovering from medial elbow pain, which
combines stretches, nerve mobility, and
strength training all into one
convenient routine on your phone. You
can get that today on our website at
hoopersba.com/reoverybloopprint.
These are the exact injury specific
programs I've used in my practice to
help hundreds of climbers get back to on
the wall painfree. They'll take you from
the earliest stages of healing all the
way to regaining full strength and
returning to peak performance. Our
recovery blueprints are a proven way to
fasttrack your recovery and get you
climbing hard again. And we don't just
have elbow recovery blueprints either.
If you've been dealing with finger pain
or TFCC or wrist pain, we've got you
covered with more to come in the future
as well. Alternative forms of treatment.
If you're struggling with elbow pain
that doesn't respond to load management,
strength training, or nerve
mobilizations, the first step would be
to seek professional medical advice for
individualized treatment. But here are a
few other options that you should be
aware of. One, injections, including
cortisone, PRP, and prolotherapy among
others. Two, extra corporeal shockwave
therapy, which is a non-invasive
treatment that delivers high energy
acoustic waves to the painful tendon
area. Three, dry needling, which
involves inserting thin, sterile needles
into specific myofascial trigger points
or muscle knots in the tight forearm
muscles. Four, bracing, which can help
if you're experiencing symptoms from
your elbow being in certain positions
while you sleep. Five, ice, which can
help some individuals immediately after
an activity to calm a reactive tendon or
nerve. Six, heat, which can relax tight
muscles and promote blood flow. Just a
note, none of those are in any kind of
specific order indicating how effective
they may or may not be. Don't forget to
use that code hoopers beta at checkout
for 25% off your entire real land order.
If you're interested in reading that
research paper I mentioned, just email
pt hoopersba.com. Until next time,
train, climb, send, and